
[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 2, 1867.

GLADIATORS PREPARING FOR THE ARENA.

The Conservative Reform Bill was to be the principal measure of the
approaching Session, and as the question had proved a fatal one to the
Whig Administration in the preceding year there was every prospect of a
keenly contested struggle.--1867.

No. 30. _Frontispiece._]




    THE RT. HON.
    JOHN BRIGHT
    M.P.

    [Illustration]

    Cartoons from the Collection of
    “MR. PUNCH.”

    PUNCH OFFICE, 85, FLEET STREET, LONDON.
    1878.




    LONDON:
    BRADBURY, AGNEW, & CO., PRINTERS, WHITEFRIARS.




The Rt. Hon. John Bright, M.P.


Son of Jacob Bright, of Greenbank, Rochdale, Lancashire; born in 1811;
one of the firm of John Bright and Brothers, cotton spinners and
manufacturers, Rochdale; a member of the Society of Friends; joined the
Anti-Corn-Law League soon after its formation in 1838, and, with Mr.
Cobden, became one of its leading members, and the powerful champion
of Free Trade; returned to Parliament for the city of Durham in 1843,
and continued to sit as its representative till 1847, when he was
elected for Manchester; opposed the war with Russia, 1854; rejected at
Manchester at the General Election in 1857, consequent on the defeat
of Lord Palmerston’s Government on the China question; returned for
Birmingham the same year, and is still member for that constituency;
the great advocate of Free Trade, Financial Reform, a wide extension of
the Suffrage, a redistribution of Seats and the Ballot, of the cause of
Ireland and India, of National Education, and of Peace; in the American
Civil War took the Anti-Slavery side, and was the staunch supporter of
the Northern States; visited Ireland in 1866; accepted a post in Mr.
Gladstone’s Cabinet in 1868 as President of the Board of Trade--the
state of his health prevented him from undertaking the duties of the
India Office--when he was nominated a Privy Councillor; resigned office
at the end of 1870; on his health becoming more satisfactory, he
returned to the Gladstone Cabinet in 1873, as Chancellor of the Duchy
of Lancaster, but retired with his colleagues at the beginning of the
following year.

Mr. Bright is one of the most eloquent and effective orators of his
time, and his speeches were collected and published in 1868; the policy
which he has for so many years advocated has in most points been in the
end accepted by the nation.




A LIST OF THE CARTOONS.


  YEAR.                                                            NO.

         _Acrobats at Westminster_                             _Title_

  1846.  _The Seven-League Boots_                                    1

  1849.  _A Bright Idea_                                             2

  1852.  “_Not Quite such a Fine Child as the Last!_”                3

    ”    _Eating the Leek_                                           4

  1854.  _Pet of the Manchester School_                              5

  1855.  _The New Coalition_                                         6

  1857.  _Recoil of the great Chinese Gun-Trick_                     7

  1858.  _Orestes pursued by the Furies_                             8

    ”    “_It will soon Boil!_”                                      9

    ”    _Mr. Bright offers to give Satisfaction to the Liberal
             Party_                                                 10

  1859.  _A Very Greasy Pole_                                       11

    ”    _The Quaker and the Bauble_                                12

    ”    _Who will Rouse Him?_                                      13

    ”    _The Real Ugly Rush_                                       14

  1860.  _The Reform Janus_                                         15

    ”    _Bright the Peace-Maker_                                   16

    ”    _Dissent in Earnest_                                       17

  1863.  _Cobden’s Logic_                                           18

  1865.  _Dr. Bright and his Patient_                               19

    ”    _The Political “Wall-Flower”_                              20

  1865.  _John Slow and John Fast_                                  21

    ”    _Scene from St. Stephen’s Pantomime_                       22

  1866.  _The Officious Passenger_                                  23

    ”    _Going Down to the House_                                  24

    ”    _The Brummagem Frankenstein_                               25

    ”    _The Popular Poll-Parrot_                                  26

    ”    _Dr. Dulcamara in Dublin_                                  27

    ”    _The Festive Season_                                       28

  1867.  _Rival Sweepers_                                           29

    ”    _Gladiators Preparing for the Arena_ (_Frontispiece_)      30

  1868.  _Dr. Bull’s Waiting-Room_                                  31

    ”    _Athletics at Westminster_                                 32

    ”    _A Dress Rehearsal_                                        33

    ”    _A “Friend” at Court_                                      34

  1869.  “_Rejected!_”                                              35

    ”    _Forgetting his Place_                                     36

  1870.  _John Bright’s New Reform Bill--“Reform Yourselves”_       37

    ”    _The Bill of Fare_                                         38

  1872.  “_Off Greenwich_”                                          39

  1873.  _A Friend in Need_                                         40

  1875.  _The New Shepherd_                                         41




    THE RT. HON.
    JOHN BRIGHT,
    M.P.

    CARTOONS FROM “PUNCH.”
    1846-1875.


[Illustration: CARTOON.--MARCH 7, 1846.

THE SEVEN-LEAGUE BOOTS;

OR, DEATH OF GIANT MONOPOLY.

The labours of Messrs. Cobden and Bright procured the recognition of
Free Trade principles, and, with Sir Robert Peel, extorted from a
reluctant Parliament the repeal of the Corn Laws.--1846.

No. 1.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--NOVEMBER 17, 1849.

A _BRIGHT_ IDEA.

THE PEACE RECRUITING SERGEANT TRYING TO ENLIST THE DUKE.

Mr. Bright’s peace principles were embodied in the plan proposed this
year to settle all international differences by arbitration. The scheme
was not viewed with much favour.--1849.

No. 2.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 21, 1852.

“NOT QUITE SUCH A FINE CHILD AS THE LAST!”

Lord John Russell’s second Reform Bill was coldly received by Mr.
Bright and other ardent reformers. The Ministry fell shortly after its
introduction, and the measure was never discussed.--1852.

No. 3.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--NOVEMBER 13, 1852.

EATING THE LEEK.

    FLUELLEN ... MR. COBDEN.      PISTOL ... MR. DISRAELI.

FLUELLEN. “_I pray you fall to; if you can mock a leek, you can eat a
leek._”-HEN. V.

The Derby Ministry declared their adherence to the Free-trade Policy of
Messrs. Cobden and Bright, which they had formerly resisted.--1852.

No. 4.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--APRIL 18, 1854.

PET OF THE MANCHESTER SCHOOL.

“_He shall have a little Turk to pull to pieces--that he shall._”

Messrs. Bright and Cobden incurred much odium by their persistent
opposition to the Anti-Russian feeling of the nation at the outbreak of
the Crimean war.--1854.

No. 5.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--OCTOBER 27, 1855.

THE NEW COALITION.

Messrs. Bright, Gladstone, and Disraeli were, at this time (though for
different reasons) in accord in their opposition to Lord Palmerston’s
Government.--1855.

No. 6.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--APRIL 11, 1857.

RECOIL OF THE GREAT CHINESE GUN-TRICK.

Mr. Bright was rejected at Manchester on Lord Palmerston’s appeal
to the country after his defeat by Mr. Cobden on the China
Question. He was shortly afterwards returned for Birmingham without
opposition.--1857.

No. 7.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JUNE 19, 1858.

ORESTES PURSUED BY THE FURIES.

Mr. Bright and Mr. Roebuck supported the Conservative Ministry, then
threatened by a vote of censure, mainly to prevent Lord Palmerston’s
return to office.--1858.

No. 8.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--NOVEMBER 6, 1858.

“IT WILL SOON BOIL!”

The constituencies at this time were apathetic on the Reform Question.
Mr. Bright had been addressing numerous Meetings to elicit popular
support.--1858.

No. 9.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--DECEMBER 18, 1858.

MR. BRIGHT OFFERS TO GIVE SATISFACTION TO THE LIBERAL PARTY.

Mr. Bright rejected the timid Reform proposals of the Whigs, and
demanded the widest extension of the franchise.--1858.

No. 10.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JANUARY 29, 1859.

A VERY GREASY POLE.

Mr. Bright had been addressing large Meetings in the manufacturing
districts to agitate for an extension of the franchise to all rated
householders.--1859.

No. 11.]


[Illustration: CARTOON--FEBRUARY 5, 1859.

THE QUAKER AND THE BAUBLE.

“_It is the Land which the territorial party represents in Parliament.
* * * That is the theory of the Constitution_: BLACKSTONE _says so. But
it is a thing which is not likely to be respected much longer, and it
mus’ go, even if involving the destruction of the Constitution._”--MR.
BRIGHT, in his Penny Organ.

The “Morning Star”--a journal founded to advocate the views of Mr.
Bright--met with little support. After an uncertain existence of some
years, it was discontinued.--1859.

No. 12.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--MARCH 12, 1859.

WHO WILL ROUSE HIM?

Mr. Bright’s pertinacious demand for a Reform Bill, and the endeavours
of both political parties to settle the question, failed to awaken the
indifference of the constituencies.--1859.

No. 13.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--APRIL 30, 1859.

THE REAL UGLY RUSH.

“_He feared there would be an ugly rush some of these days._”--MR.
HENLEY on the Reform Bill.

The Reform Question had become for both parties a battle ground for the
possession of the Treasury bench. It proved fatal to the Derby Ministry
in the preceding month.--1859.

No. 14.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--MAY 5, 1860.

THE REFORM JANUS.

{To Mr. Bright: “Just the thing you want my dear Bright: double your
constituency!”

To a Conservative: “Pray don’t be alarmed!--It Only adds one per cent
to the franchise!”}

Lord John Russell’s new Reform proposals, though framed with great
care, again failed to receive Mr. Bright’s approval, and were at the
same time distasteful to the Conservative Party.--1860.

No. 15.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JUNE 9, 1860.

BRIGHT THE PEACE-MAKER.

Mr. Bright took an active part in supporting the repeal of the Paper
Duty. He condemned the action of the Upper House in rejecting the Bill,
and charged them with usurping the powers properly belonging to the
Commons.--1860.

No. 16.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JULY 21, 1860.

DISSENT IN EARNEST.

“_We defer to their feelings, but we cannot assent to their
reasoning._”--PARL. DEBATE.

Mr. Bright’s forcible opposition influenced the Government in
withdrawing from the Census Bill the invidious clause relating to the
Statistics of Religious Denominations.--1860.

No. 17.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--DECEMBER 5, 1863.

{Well-dressed Mr. Cobden to poorly-dressed beggar: “You are the
greatest booby in the Universe, and therefore you ought to have a vote.”

Mr. Bright: “Hear! Hear!”}

COBDEN’S LOGIC.

“_I don’t know, perhaps, any country in the world where the_ MASSES OF
THE PEOPLE ARE SO ILLITERATE AS IN ENGLAND. * * * _Sound Statesmanship
requires such an extension of the franchise as shall admit the Masses
of the People to political power._”--From MR. COBDEN’S Speech at
Rochdale.

This speech gave occasion to much angry comment, and led to a personal
dispute between Mr. Cobden and the Editor of the _Times_.--1863.

No. 18.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 4, 1865.

DR. BRIGHT AND HIS PATIENT.

DOCTOR. “_Do you get good wages?_”

PATIENT. “_Yes._”

DOCTOR. “_Have you plenty to eat and drink?_”

PATIENT. “_Yes, as far as that goes._”

DOCTOR. “_Do you do as you like?_”

PATIENT. “_Yes._”

DOCTOR. “_Do you pay taxes?_”

PATIENT. “_None to hurt me much._”

DOCTOR. “_Ah! We must change all that. We must go in for_ REFORM!”

This colloquy gives a not unfair summary of Mr. Bright’s address to his
constituents in the preceding month.--1865.

No. 19.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--NOVEMBER 25, 1865.

{Lord Russell to another woman: “Will you join our set Miss Goshen?”}

THE POLITICAL “WALL-FLOWER.”

MISS BRIGHT. “_Nobody asks_ ME; _and if they did, I should certainly
decline._”

Lord Russell’s Whig prejudices were too strong to permit his offering
Mr. Bright a seat in the Cabinet--though none had better deserved
it.--1865.

No. 20.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--DECEMBER 9, 1865.

JOHN SLOW AND JOHN FAST.

EARL RUSSELL. “_Well, well! Don’t be violent, Mr. Bright, and proper
inquiries shall be made, as we have perfect confidence in our friend,
Mr. Workingman._”

Lord Russell claimed to have a monopoly of the Reform Question, and was
not prepared to make the violent changes demanded by Mr. Bright.--1865.

No. 21.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--DECEMBER 30, 1865.

SCENE FROM ST. STEPHEN’S PANTOMIME.

CLOWN (MR. BR-GHT). “_What a beautiful child! Let me take care of it
for yer, mum._”

The Ministry were deaf alike to Mr. Bright’s menaces and persuasions,
and their Bill, as ultimately framed, did not contain any of the points
for which he contended.--1865.

No. 22.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JANUARY 20, 1866.

{Mr. Bright using speaking trumpet: “LOWER AWAY THERE LOWER AWAY”}

THE OFFICIOUS PASSENGER.

LORD JOHN. “_Excuse me, friend Bright, but do you command this ship, or
do I?_”

Mr. Bright not having been admitted to the Cabinet, was endeavouring
from the platform to force the hands of the Ministry.--1866.

No. 23.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 10, 1866.

GOING DOWN TO THE HOUSE.

LORD RUSSELL. “_Well, Bright, what do you want?_”

JOHNNY BRIGHT. “_Anything your Honour is willing to give me_ NOW.”

Mr. Bright was now prepared to accept any reduction of the
franchise--being convinced that neither the Ministry nor Parliament
would agree to a Radical measure.--1866.

No. 24.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--SEPTEMBER 8, 1866.

THE BRUMMAGEM FRANKENSTEIN.

JOHN BRIGHT. “_I have no fe--fe--fear of ma--manhood suffrage!_”

    [MR. BRIGHT’S Speech at Birmingham.

The unwillingness of Parliament to accept any measure of Reform had
aroused a wide-spread discontent amongst the working classes. A monster
gathering was held at Birmingham in August.--1866.

No. 25.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--OCTOBER 20, 1866.

{Parrot sitting on perch marked “UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE”}

THE POPULAR POLL-PARROT.

PARROT SONG. “_Pretty democra--a--ats! Take ’em to the poll! Naughty
Bob Lowe! Schgree--e--e--yx!!!_”

Mr. Bright was now addressing Reform Meetings in various towns. The
burden of them was--an abuse of Mr. Lowe, who had aided in rejecting
Lord Russell’s measure.--1866.

No. 26.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--NOVEMBER 10, 1866.

{Mr. Bright holding bottle labelled “RADICAL REFORM”.}

DR. DULCAMARA IN DUBLIN.

Mr. Bright visited Dublin, by request, in October. His speeches were
mainly devoted to the discussion of Irish questions.--1866.

No. 27.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--DECEMBER 29, 1866.

THE FESTIVE SEASON.

(_A Pleasant, but we fear a somewhat Improbable, Picture._)

MR. B * * * * *, M.P. “_I shay Lowe, old f’la, lesh shwear ’ternal
fr’en’ship!_”

MR. L * * *, M.P. “_All right, Johnny. Been boshe in the wrong._”

Not so improbable after all. Within two years from this date Messrs.
Bright and Lowe were colleagues in the same Cabinet.--1866.

No. 28.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JANUARY 12, 1867.

RIVAL SWEEPERS.

GENERAL CHORUS. “_Clear yer door-step down, mum?_”

All parties were pledged to a renewal of the Reform discussion in
the approaching Session. There was, therefore, every prospect of an
animated rivalry.--1867.

No. 29.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 15, 1868.

DR. BULL’S WAITING-ROOM.

BENJAMIN (_to_ HIBERNIA). “_Please’m, the doctor’ll take your case
fust’m._”

Mr. Bright’s further agitation of the Reform Question was (for the
present) arrested by that of the Irish Church, which was uppermost in
the minds of the country.--1868.

No. 31.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JULY 11, 1868.

ATHLETICS AT WESTMINSTER.

JOHN BRIGHT. “_Ha! Won’t you ketch it next half when our big brother
comes!!!_”

Mr. Gladstone’s Irish Church Suspensory Bill was thrown out by the
Lords. The “big brother” was the Borough constituencies enlarged by the
New Reform Bill.--1868.

No. 32.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--SEPTEMBER 12, 1868.

A DRESS REHEARSAL.

FRIEND BRIGHT. “_H’m! Ha! Verily these Ministerial garments won’t be so
unbecoming, after all!_”

    [Said, in other words, in his last address.]

The Leadership of the Liberal Party having escaped from the hands of
the Whigs, made it more than probable that Mr. Bright would have a seat
in their next Cabinet.--1868.

No. 33.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--DECEMBER 19, 1868.

A “FRIEND” AT COURT.

WHAT WE HAVE READ. “_Mr. Bright attended yesterday at Windsor, and
kissed Her Majesty’s hand on his appointment to the Board of Trade._”

The defeat of the Conservatives at the General Election was followed
by the formation of a Liberal Administration, in which Mr. Bright was
included as President of the Board of Trade.--1868.

No. 34.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--MAY 8, 1869.

“REJECTED!”

OR, THE VICISSITUDES OF _ART_.

Mr. Bright’s long advocacy of the Irish Church Disestablishment, after
being in principle rejected alike by all Administrations, was now
successfully realized.--1869.

No. 35.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JUNE 26, 1869.

FORGETTING HIS PLACE.

JOHN BRIGHT. “_Irish Church coming down!--pull out o’ the way there
with that ‘infatuated’ old machine of yours--can’t yer?_”

GROOM OF THE CHAMBERS. “_John, John, you’re_ FORGETTING YOUR
PLACE--_you mustn’t use that sort of language_ NOW.”

Mr. Bright’s characteristic disregard of the Upper House had been
unwisely expressed in a published letter to his constituents.--1869.

No. 36.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JANUARY 22, 1870.

JOHN BRIGHT’S NEW REFORM BILL.--

“REFORM YOURSELVES!”

Mr. Bright addressed his constituents on the evils of the Liquor
traffic; urging, that it was a question--not for Government, but for
themselves.--1870.

No. 37.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 5, 1870.

THE BILL OF FARE.

MR. GLADSTONE (THE “CHEF”). “_Irish stew first, Mrs. B., and then----_”

MRS. BRIGHT (THE COOK). “_Lor bless you, Mr. G., the Irish stew’s quite
as much as they’ll get through, I’ll be bound!_”

Commenting on the difficulty of passing several important measures
in one Session, Mr. Bright had said, “It was not easy to drive six
omnibuses abreast through Temple Bar.”--1870.

No. 38.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JANUARY 13, 1872.

“OFF GREENWICH.”

JOHN BRIGHT. “_Come aboard, sir!_”

CAPTAIN GLADSTONE. “_Glad to see you, John. Glad you’re A.B. again. If
it comes on to blow, we may want your assistance._”

Mr. Bright had withdrawn from the Ministry on account of ill-health.
His re-appearance in Parliament tended to strengthen the now weakened
Administration.--1872.

No. 39.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--OCTOBER 11, 1873.

A FRIEND IN NEED.

MR. GLADSTONE. “_My dear John, I congratulate you! Just in time to
settle accounts with our black friend yonder!_”

JOHN BRIGHT. “_H’m! Fighting is not quite in my line, as thee knowest,
friend William; nevertheless----!_”

Several important changes had been made with the view of strengthening
the Cabinet. Amongst others, Mr. Bright again accepted office as
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. The Ashantee War was now in
progress.--1873.

No. 40.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 13, 1875.

THE NEW SHEPHERD.

HARTINGTON (_new hand, just taken on_). “_Hey, but measter!_--WHERE BE
THE SHEEP?”

Mr. Bright’s nomination of Lord Hartington as Leader of the shattered
Liberal Party was acquiesced in by the rival candidates.--1875.

No. 41.]




Transcriber’s Notes:


Dialog in some cartoons is shown in {curly braces}; descriptions
accompanying such dialog were added by Transcriber.

Cartoon 22: “Mr. Br-ght” was printed with the hyphen in place of “i”.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Rt. Hon. John Bright M.P.;
Cartoons from the Collection o, by Various

